Guide for authors
About the journal
Aims and scope
Article types
Peer review
Open access
Ethics and policies
Ethics in publishing
Submission declaration
Authorship
Changes to authorship
Declaration of competing interests
Funding sources
Declaration of generative AI use
Preprints
Use of inclusive language
Reporting sex- and gender-based analyses
Image manipulation
Jurisdictional claims
Delayed publication
Writing and formatting
File format
LaTeX
Title page
Double anonymized peer review
Abstract
Keywords
Highlights
Graphical abstract
Units, classiﬁcations codes and nomenclature
Math formulae
Tables
Figures, images and artwork
Generative AI and Figures, images and artwork
Supplementary material
Video
Research data
Data statement
Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Supports open access

Data linking
Co-submission of related data, methods or protocols
Article structure
References
Submitting your manuscript
Submit online
After receiving a ﬁnal decision
Article Transfer Service
Publishing agreement
License options
Open access
Permission for copyrighted works
Online pre-proof article
Proof correction
Share Link
Responsible sharing
Resources for authors
Language and editing services
Getting help and support
Author support
About the journal
Aims and scope
A journal of IFAC, The International Federation of Automatic Control.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is playing a major role in the fourth industrial revolution, and we are seeing a lot of
evolution in various machine learning methodologies. AI techniques are widely used by the practicing engineer to
solve a whole range of hitherto intractable problems. Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence provides an
international forum for rapid publication of work describing the practical application of AI methods in all branches
of engineering. Submitted papers should report novel aspects of AI used for a real-world engineering application
and also validated using public data sets for easy replicability of the research results.
Focal points of the journal include, but are not limited to, innovative applications of:
Internet–of–things and cyber-physical systems
Intelligent transportation systems & smart vehicles
Big data analytics, understanding complex networks
Neural networks, fuzzy systems, neuro-fuzzy systems
Deep learning and real-world applications

Self-organizing, emerging or bio-inspired system
Global optimization, Meta-heuristics and their applications: Evolutionary Algorithms, swarm intelligence, nature
and biologically inspired meta-heuristics, etc.
Architectures, algorithms and techniques for distributed AI systems, including multi-agent based control and
holonic control
Decision-support systems
Aspects of reasoning: abductive, case-based, model-based, non-monotonic, incomplete, progressive and
approximate reasoning
Applications of chaos theory and fractals
Real-time intelligent automation, and their associated supporting methodologies and techniques, including
control theory and industrial informatics
Knowledge processing, knowledge elicitation and acquisition, knowledge representation, knowledge
compaction, knowledge bases, expert systems
Perception, e.g. image processing, pattern recognition, vision systems, tactile systems, speech recognition and
synthesis
Aspects of software engineering, e.g. intelligent programming environments, veriﬁcation and validation of AI-
based software, software and hardware architectures for the real-time use of AI techniques, safety and reliability
Intelligent fault detection, fault analysis, diagnostics and monitoring
Industrial experiences in the application of the above techniques, e.g. case studies or benchmarking exercises
Robotics
Papers which do not respect the four following conditions will be desk-rejected without being sent for peer review:
Papers on new metaphor-based metaheuristics are very rarely accepted by Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (please see further details in the ‘Article types’ section of the Guide for Authors)
The abstract should clearly specify which is the contribution in AI, and which is the application in engineering
The use of undeﬁned acronyms in the title and in the abstract is forbidden
The papers must be formatted in single-column format
For more details on the International Federation of Automatic Control (IFAC), visit their home page.
Article types
Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence publishes Original Research articles, Short Communications, Survey
Paper / Tutorials, Case Studies / Software Reviews.

Original Research articles:
(contributed papers) Detailed expositions of new high-quality research or applications of AI in engineering.
Survey Papers / Tutorials:
Provides a concise overview of existing research, methodologies, and developments.
Case Studies or Software Reviews:
Evaluative and descriptive reviews of existing available AI software systems, discussing the experience gained
and lessons learnt from using or developing AI systems for engineering applications.
IFAC EAAI Forum (Short Communications):
Problems arising from engineering practice, needing to be solved by somebody; solutions to problems discussed
in this forum or elsewhere; critiques of a position or claim found in the literature.
Please note that Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence will not publish papers that propose "novel"
metaphor-based metaheuristics, unless the authors:
1. present their method using the normal, standard optimization terminology;
2. show that the new method brings useful and novel concepts to the ﬁeld;
3. motivate the use of the metaphor on a sound, scientiﬁc basis;
4. present a fair comparison with other state-of-the-art methods using state-of-the-art practices for benchmarking
algorithms.
Please note that all submissions must not exceed 50 pages, and the manuscript ﬁle size should be under 100 MB.
Submissions that do not meet these requirements will be subject to desk rejection.
Software co-submission – Software Impacts
This journal encourages and enables you to share software that supports your research publication where
appropriate, enabling you to interlink the software and data with your published article. If your research article is
accepted in Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, you have the option to convert your open source
software into an additional journal publication in Software Impacts, a multi-disciplinary open access journal that
provides a scholarly reference to software that has been used to address a research challenge. Software Impacts
ensures that your software is actively reviewed, curated, formatted, indexed, given a DOI and publicly available to all
upon publication. Full details can be found on the Software Impacts Guide for Authors. Please note that an open
access fee may apply for publication in Software Impacts.
Papers from IFAC technical meetings
Papers submitted to IFAC journals with prior publication in any copyrighted conference proceedings must be
substantially diﬀerent from the conference publication. Authors should indicate in the cover letter in detail how the
journal paper diﬀers from the relevant conference paper or papers. In particular, the additional original contribution

in the journal paper has to be pointed out explicitly. In the journal paper, the conference paper has to be cited and
discussed as any other paper in the list of references.
Peer review
This journal follows a double anonymized review process. Your submission will initially be assessed by our editors to
determine suitability for publication in this journal. If your submission is deemed suitable, it will typically be sent to a
minimum of two reviewers for an independent expert assessment of the scientiﬁc quality. The decision as to whether
your article is accepted or rejected will be taken by our editors.
Read more about peer review.
Our editors are not involved in making decisions about papers which:
they have written themselves.
have been written by family members or colleagues.
relate to products or services in which they have an interest.
Any such submissions will be subject to the journal's usual procedures and peer review will be handled
independently of the editor involved and their research group. Read more about editor duties.
Authors may submit a formal appeal request to the editorial decision, provided it meets all the requirements and
follows the procedure outlined in Elsevier’s Appeal Policy. Only one appeal per submission will be considered and the
appeal decision will be ﬁnal.
Special issues and article collections
The peer review process for special issues and article collections follows the same process as outlined above for
regular submissions, except, a guest editor may send the submissions out to the reviewers and may recommend a
decision to the journal editor. The journal editor oversees the peer review process of all special issues and article
collections to ensure the high standards of publishing ethics and responsiveness are respected and is responsible for
the ﬁnal decision regarding acceptance or rejection of articles.
Open access
We refer you to our open access information page to learn about open access options for this journal.
Ethics and policies
Ethics in publishing
Authors must follow ethical guidelines stated in Elsevier's Publishing Ethics Policy.
Submission declaration
When authors submit an article to an Elsevier journal it is implied that:
the work described has not been published previously except in the form of a preprint, an abstract, a published
lecture, academic thesis or registered report. See our policy on multiple, redundant or concurrent publication.
the article is not under consideration for publication elsewhere.

the article's publication is approved by all authors and tacitly or explicitly by the responsible authorities where
the work was carried out.
if accepted, the article will not be published elsewhere in the same form, in English or in any other language,
including electronically, without the written consent of the copyright-holder.
To verify compliance with our journal publishing policies, we may check your manuscript with our screening tools.
Authorship
All authors should have made substantial contributions to all of the following:
1. The conception and design of the study, or acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of data.
2. Drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content.
3. Final approval of the version to be submitted.
Authors should appoint a corresponding author to communicate with the journal during the editorial process. All
authors should agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work to ensure that the questions related to the
accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved.
Changes to authorship
The editors of this journal generally will not consider changes to authorship once a manuscript has been submitted.
It is important that authors carefully consider the authorship list and order of authors and provide a deﬁnitive
author list at submission.  
The policy of this journal around authorship changes:  
All authors must be listed in the manuscript and their details entered into the submission system. Changes can
only be made prior to acceptance, and only if approved by the journal editor. This includes additions, deletion, or
rearrangement of author names.
Requests to change authorship must be made by the corresponding author using the Authorship Change Request
form. The corresponding author must provide the reason for the request to the journal editor with written
conﬁrmation from all authors, including any authors being added or removed, that they agree with the changes.
Requests which do not comply with the instructions outlined in the form will not be considered.
This journal does not allow authorship changes after acceptance. This includes additions, deletions, or the
rearrangement of author names, including changes to the corresponding author.
The review process may be paused while a change in authorship request is being considered.
Change requests made by the authors without the Authorship Change Request form or editor approval may
result in the rejection of the manuscript, or retraction if the article has already been published.
Declaration of competing interests
All authors must disclose any ﬁnancial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that could
inappropriately inﬂuence or bias their work. Examples of potential competing interests include:
Employment

Consultancies
Stock ownership
Honoraria
Paid expert testimony
Patent applications or registrations
Grants or any other funding
Aﬃliation with the journal as an Editor or Advisory Board Member
The declarations tool should always be completed.
Authors with a journal aﬃliation to declare should enter the following text under “Other Activities” within
the  declarations tool and should inform the journal and publisher prior to completing the submission process:
Given their role as [insert journal role title], [insert your name] had no involvement in the peer-review of this article and
has no access to information regarding its peer-review.  Full responsibility for the editorial process for this article was
delegated to another journal editor.
Editorial disclosure statements will be included as a footnote and/or in the declaration of competing interest section
of the article.
Authors with no competing interests to declare should select the option "I have nothing to declare".
The resulting Word document containing your declaration should be uploaded at the "attach/upload ﬁles" step in the
submission process. It is important that the Word document is saved in the .doc/.docx ﬁle format. Author signatures
are not required.
Funding sources
Authors must disclose any funding sources who provided ﬁnancial support for the conduct of the research and/or
preparation of the article. The role of sponsors, if any, should be declared in relation to the study design, collection,
analysis and interpretation of data, writing of the report and decision to submit the article for publication. If funding
sources had no such involvement this should be stated in your submission.
List funding sources in this standard way to facilitate compliance to funder's requirements:
Funding: This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [grant numbers xxxx, yyyy]; the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA [grant number zzzz]; and the United States Institutes of Peace [grant number aaaa].
It is not necessary to include detailed descriptions on the program or type of grants, scholarships and awards. When
funding is from a block grant or other resources available to a university, college, or other research institution,
submit the name of the institute or organization that provided the funding.
If no funding has been provided for the research, it is recommended to include the following sentence:
This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt
sectors.

Declaration of generative AI use
Authors must declare the use of generative AI in the manuscript preparation process upon submission of the paper.
Elsevier recognizes the potential of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies (“AI Tools”), when used responsibly, to
help researchers work eﬃciently, gain critical insights fast and achieve better outcomes. Increasingly, these tools,
including AI agents and deep research tools, are helping researchers to synthesize complex literature, provide an
overview of a ﬁeld or research question, identify research gaps, generate ideas, and provide tailored support for
tasks such as content organization and improving language and readability.
Authors preparing a manuscript for this journal can use AI Tools to support them. However, these tools must never
be used as a substitute for human critical thinking, expertise and evaluation. AI technology should always be applied
with human oversight and control.
Ultimately, authors are responsible and accountable for the contents of their work. This includes accountability for:
Carefully reviewing and verifying the accuracy, comprehensiveness, and impartiality of all AI-generated output
(including checking the sources, as AI-generated references can be incorrect or fabricated).
Editing and adapting all material thoroughly to ensure the manuscript represents the author’s authentic and
original contribution and reﬂects their own analysis, interpretation, insights and ideas.
Ensuring the use of any tools or sources, AI-based or otherwise, is made clear and transparent to readers. If AI
Tools have been used, we require a disclosure statement upon submission; please see example below.
Ensuring the manuscript is developed in a way that safeguards data privacy, intellectual property and other
rights, by checking the terms and conditions of any AI tool that is used.
Finally, authors must not list or cite AI Tools as an author or co-author on the manuscript since authorship implies
responsibilities and tasks that can only be attributed to, and performed by, humans.
The use of AI Tools in the manuscript preparation process must be declared by adding a statement at the end of the
manuscript when the paper is ﬁrst submitted. The statement will appear in the published work and should be placed
in a new section before the references list.
An example:
Title of new section: Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the manuscript preparation
process.
Statement: During the preparation of this work the author(s) used [NAME OF TOOL / SERVICE] in order to [REASON].
After using this tool/service, the author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and take(s) full responsibility
for the content of the published article.
The declaration does not apply to the use of basic tools, such as tools used to check grammar, spelling and
references. If you have nothing to disclose, you do not need to add a statement.
Please read Elsevier’s author policy on the use of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies, which can be found in
the generative AI policies for journals.

Please note: to protect authors’ rights and the conﬁdentiality of their research, this journal does not currently allow
the use of generative AI or AI-assisted technologies such as ChatGPT or similar services by reviewers or editors in the
peer review and manuscript evaluation process, as is stated in Elsevier's generative AI policies for journals. Elsevier is
actively evaluating compliant AI Tools and may revise this policy in the future.
Preprints
Preprint sharing
Authors may share preprints in line with Elsevier's article sharing policy. Sharing preprints, such as on a preprint
server, will not count as prior publication.
We advise you to read our policy on multiple, redundant or concurrent publication.
In support of Open Science, this journal oﬀers its authors a free preprint posting service on SSRN, Elsevier’s preprint
and early research repository.
During submission to this journal, you can choose to post your manuscript on SSRN, and it will be made publicly
available as soon as it passes the journal's initial desk review.
As a preprint on SSRN, your manuscript will beneﬁt from:
Early registration with a preprint DOI (Digital Object Identiﬁer)
A link from the preprint to the version of record if published in this Elsevier journal
Preprint posting, sharing, and download availability that facilitates collaboration and early citations
Your decision to post or not post your preprint will have no eﬀect on the editorial process or publication outcome
with the journal. For additional information, please consult the SSRN Terms of Use and FAQs.
It is expected that the corresponding author will seek approval from all co-authors before agreeing to post the
manuscript publicly, prior to peer review, on SSRN.
Use of inclusive language
Inclusive language acknowledges diversity, conveys respect to all people, is sensitive to diﬀerences, and promotes
equal opportunities. Authors should ensure their work uses inclusive language throughout and contains nothing
which might imply one individual is superior to another on the grounds of:
age
gender
race
ethnicity
culture
sexual orientation
disability or health condition

We recommend avoiding the use of descriptors about personal attributes unless they are relevant and valid. Write
for gender neutrality with the use of plural nouns ("clinicians, patients/clients") as default. Wherever possible, avoid
using "he, she," or "he/she."
No assumptions should be made about the beliefs of readers and writing should be free from bias, stereotypes,
slang, reference to dominant culture and/or cultural assumptions.
These guidelines are meant as a point of reference to help you identify appropriate language but are by no means
exhaustive or deﬁnitive.
Reporting sex- and gender-based analyses
There is no single, universally agreed-upon set of guidelines for deﬁning sex and gender. We oﬀer the following
guidance:
Sex and gender-based analyses (SGBA) should be integrated into research design when research involves or
pertains to humans, animals or eukaryotic cells. This should be done in accordance with any requirements set by
funders or sponsors and best practices within a ﬁeld.
Sex and/or gender dimensions of the research should be addressed within the article or declared as a limitation
to the generalizability of the research.
Deﬁnitions of sex and/or gender applied should be explicitly stated to enhance the precision, rigor and
reproducibility of the research and to avoid ambiguity or conﬂation of terms and the constructs to which they
refer.
We advise you to read the Sex and Gender Equity in Research (SAGER) guidelines and the SAGER checklist (PDF) on
the EASE website, which oﬀer systematic approaches to the use of sex and gender information in study design, data
analysis, outcome reporting and research interpretation.
For further information we suggest reading the rationale behind and recommended use of the SAGER guidelines.
Deﬁnitions of sex and/or gender
We ask authors to deﬁne how sex and gender have been used in their research and publication. Some guidance:
Sex generally refers to a set of biological attributes that are associated with physical and physiological features
such as chromosomal genotype, hormonal levels, internal and external anatomy. A binary sex categorization
(male/female) is usually designated at birth ("sex assigned at birth") and is in most cases based solely on the
visible external anatomy of a newborn. In reality, sex categorizations include people who are intersex/have
diﬀerences of sex development (DSD).
Gender generally refers to socially constructed roles, behaviors and identities of women, men and gender-diverse
people that occur in a historical and cultural context and may vary across societies and over time. Gender
inﬂuences how people view themselves and each other, how they behave and interact and how power is
distributed in society.
Depending on the focus of a paper, sex and/or gender may or may not be relevant to the content of the paper. We
recognize that beliefs, attitudes, and laws relating to sex and gender may vary. These articles do not attempt to
dictate author beliefs but rather require that, where relevant to an author’s research or paper, the author must
provide clear explanations of how the paper and research deﬁne and use sex and gender.

Image manipulation
We accept that authors sometimes need to adjust images for clarity but any manipulation of images for the purpose
of deception or fraud will be seen as scientiﬁc ethical abuse and will be dealt with accordingly.
Authors must adhere to this journal’s policy for graphical images:
No speciﬁc feature within an image may be enhanced, obscured, moved, removed or introduced.
Adjustments of brightness, contrast, or color balance are acceptable if, and only as long as, they do not obscure
or eliminate any information present in the original image.
Nonlinear adjustments such as changes to gamma settings must be disclosed in the ﬁgure legend.
We do not permit the use of generative AI or AI-assisted tools to create or alter images in submitted
manuscripts. Please read our policy on the use of generative AI and AI-assisted tools in ﬁgures, images and
artwork, which can be found in Elsevier’s GenAI Policies for Journals.
To verify compliance with the above, this journal may send your images to a secure third-party tool to enable
screening for image irregularities. Our editors may ask you to provide original data or images if any questions arise
as a result of the screening. The ﬁnal decision as to whether images are acceptable will be taken by our editors.
Authors are encouraged to carefully check all images before submission and to connect all the data in any ﬁgures to
the original, unprocessed data.
Jurisdictional claims
Elsevier respects the decisions taken by its authors as to how they choose to designate territories and identify their
aﬃliations in their published content. Elsevier’s policy is to take a neutral position with respect to territorial disputes
or jurisdictional claims, including, but not limited to, maps and institutional aﬃliations. For journals that Elsevier
publishes on behalf of a third party owner, the owner may set its own policy on these issues.
Maps: Readers should be able to locate any study areas shown within maps using common mapping platforms.
Maps should only show the area actually studied and authors should not include a location map which displays
a larger area than the bounding box of the study area. Authors should add a note clearly stating that "map lines
delineate study areas and do not necessarily depict accepted national boundaries”.  During the review process,
Elsevier’s editors may request authors to change maps if these guidelines are not followed.
Institutional aﬃliations: Authors should use either the full, standard title of their institution or the standard
abbreviation of the institutional name so that the institutional name can be independently veriﬁed for research
integrity purposes.
Delayed publication
If you need to delay the publication of your article for any reason, please contact the editorial oﬃce of the journal or
our Journal Article Publishing Support Center at the earliest possible opportunity. While we will try to ensure that
your article is not published before a certain date if you make your request on a timely basis, we cannot guarantee
this. Please also note that once the agreed period of delay has expired the article may be published at any time
thereafter.
Writing and formatting
File format

We ask you to provide editable source ﬁles for your entire submission (including ﬁgures, tables and text graphics).
Some guidelines:
Save ﬁles in an editable format, using the extension .doc/.docx for Word ﬁles and .tex for LaTeX ﬁles. A PDF is not
an acceptable source ﬁle.
Format Word ﬁles in a single-column layout. Double-column formatting is only permitted for LaTeX submissions.
Remove any strikethrough and underlined text from your manuscript, unless it has scientiﬁc signiﬁcance related
to your article.
Use spell-check and grammar-check functions to avoid errors.
We advise you to read our Step-by-step guide to publishing with Elsevier.
LaTeX
We encourage you use our LaTeX template when preparing a LaTeX submission. You will be asked to provide all
relevant editable source ﬁles upon submission or revision.
Support for your LaTeX submission:
LaTeX submission instructions and templates
Journal Article Publishing Support Center LaTeX FAQs and support
Researcher Academy’s Beginners’ guide to writing a manuscript in LaTeX
Title page
You are required to include the following details in the title page information:
Article title. Article titles should be concise and informative. Please avoid abbreviations and formulae, where
possible, unless they are established and widely understood, e.g. DNA.
Author names. Provide the given name(s) and family name(s) of each author. The order of authors should match
the order in the submission system. Carefully check that all names are accurately spelled. If needed, you can add
your name between parentheses in your own script after the English transliteration.
Aﬃliations. Add aﬃliation addresses, referring to where the work was carried out, below the author names.
Indicate aﬃliations using a lower-case superscript letter immediately after the author's name and in front of the
corresponding address. Ensure that you provide the full postal address of each aﬃliation, including the country
name and, if available, the email address of each author.
Corresponding author. Clearly indicate who will handle correspondence for your article at all stages of the
refereeing and publication process and also post-publication. This responsibility includes answering any future
queries about your results, data, methodology and materials. It is important that the email address and contact
details of your corresponding author are kept up to date during the submission and publication process.
Present/permanent address. If an author has moved since the work described in your article was carried out, or
the author was visiting during that time, a "present address" (or "permanent address") can be indicated by a

footnote to the author's name. The address where the author carried out the work must be retained as their
main aﬃliation address. Use superscript Arabic numerals for such footnotes.
Double anonymized peer review
As this journal follows a double anonymized review process, author identities are concealed from reviewers and vice
versa. To facilitate this process, submit your title page (including author details) and anonymized manuscript
(excluding author details) as separate ﬁles. Next to the items mentioned in the title page section of this guide, the
title page should also include:
Acknowledgements. Include any individuals who provided you with help during your research such as help with
language, writing or proof reading in the acknowledgements section. Include acknowledgements only in the title
page, do not add them as a footnote to your title, or anywhere else in your article.
Declaration of competing interests (when a separate declaration of interest ﬁle is not submitted)
Corresponding author address (full address is required)
Corresponding author email address
The anonymized manuscript should contain the main body of your paper, including references and tables. It is
important that your manuscript does not contain any identifying information such as author names or aﬃliations, or
acknowledgements.
Read more about peer review.
Abstract
You are required to provide a concise and factual abstract which does not exceed 250 words. The abstract should
brieﬂy state the purpose of your research, principal results and major conclusions. Some guidelines:
Abstracts must be able to stand alone as abstracts are often presented separately from the article.
Avoid references. If any are essential to include, ensure that you cite the author(s) and year(s).
Avoid non-standard or uncommon abbreviations. If any are essential to include, ensure they are deﬁned within
your abstract at ﬁrst mention.
Keywords
You are required to provide 1 to 6 keywords for indexing purposes. Keywords should be written in English. Please try
to avoid keywords consisting of multiple words (using "and" or "of").
We recommend that you only use abbreviations in keywords if they are ﬁrmly established in the ﬁeld.
Highlights
You are encouraged to provide article highlights at submission.
Highlights are a short collection of bullet points that should capture the novel results of your research as well as any
new methods used during your study. Highlights will help increase the discoverability of your article via search
engines. Some guidelines:

Submit highlights as a separate editable ﬁle in the online submission system with the word "highlights" included
in the ﬁle name.
Highlights should consist of 3 to 5 bullet points, each a maximum of 85 characters, including spaces.
We encourage you to view example article highlights and read about the beneﬁts of their inclusion.
Graphical abstract
You are encouraged to provide a graphical abstract at submission.
The graphical abstract summarizes the contents of your article in a concise, pictorial, professional form, highlighting
important aspects of the research. It is designed to appeal to an interdisciplinary audience, and draw more attention
to your online article. Some guidelines:
Ensure you have obtained the necessary permission to include any third party owned material in a graphical
abstract.
Use of generative AI or AI-assisted tools in the production of graphical abstracts must align with Elsevier’s GenAI
Policies for Journals.
Submit your graphical abstract as a separate ﬁle in the online submission system.
Ensure the image is 531 x 1328 pixels (h x w) or proportionally more, and is readable at a size of 5 x 13 cm.
Preferred ﬁle types for graphical abstracts are TIFF, EPS, PDF or MS Oﬃce ﬁles.
More information, examples and a template can be found in the graphical abstract guidelines.
Units, classiﬁcations codes and nomenclature
Units
This journal requires you to use the international system of units (SI) which follows internationally accepted rules
and conventions. If other units are mentioned within your article, you should provide the equivalent unit in SI.
Please provide up to 6 standard Inspec classiﬁcation codes.
Math formulae
Submit math equations as editable text, not as images.
Present simple formulae in line with normal text, where possible.
Use the solidus (/) instead of a horizontal line for small fractional terms such as X/Y.
Present variables in italics.
Denote powers of e by exp.
Display equations separately from your text, numbering them consecutively in the order they are referred to
within your text.

Tables
Tables must be submitted as editable text, not as images. Some guidelines:
Place tables next to the relevant text or on a separate page(s) at the end of your article.
Cite all tables in the manuscript text.
Number tables consecutively according to their appearance in the text.
Please provide captions along with the tables.
Place any table notes below the table body.
Avoid vertical rules and shading within table cells.
We recommend that you use tables sparingly, ensuring that any data presented in tables is not duplicating results
described elsewhere in the article.
Figures, images and artwork
Figures, images, artwork, diagrams and other graphical media must be supplied as separate ﬁles along with the
manuscript. We recommend that you read our detailed artwork and media instructions. Some excerpts:
When submitting artwork:
Cite all images in the manuscript text.
Number images according to the sequence they appear within your article.
Submit each image as a separate ﬁle using a logical naming convention for your ﬁles (for example, Figure_1,
Figure_2 etc).
Text graphics may be embedded in the text at the appropriate position. If you are working with LaTeX, text
graphics may also be embedded in the ﬁle.
Figure captions
All images must have a caption. A caption should consist of a brief title (not displayed on the ﬁgure itself) and a
description of the image. We advise you to keep the amount of text in any image to a minimum, though any symbols
and abbreviations used should be explained.
Read how to add captions to your submission here.
Artwork formats
When your artwork is ﬁnalized, "save as" or convert your electronic artwork to the formats listed below taking into
account the given resolution requirements for line drawings, halftones, and line/halftone combinations:
Vector drawings: Save as EPS or PDF ﬁles embedding the font or saving the text as "graphics."
Color or grayscale photographs (halftones): Save as TIFF, JPG or PNG ﬁles using a minimum of 300 dpi (for single
column width: min. 1063 pixels, full page width: 2244 pixels).

Bitmapped line drawings: Save as TIFF, JPG or PNG ﬁles, using a minimum of 1000 dpi (for single column width:
min. 3543 pixels, full page width: 7480 pixels).
Combinations bitmapped line/halftones (color or grayscale): Save as TIFF, JPG or PNG ﬁles using a minimum of
500 dpi (for single column: min. 1772 pixels, full page width: 3740 pixels).
Please do not submit:
Files that are too low in resolution.
Disproportionally large images compared to font size, as text may become unreadable.
Color artwork
If you submit usable color ﬁgures with your accepted article, we will ensure that they appear in color online.
Please ensure that color images are accessible to all, including those with impaired color vision. Learn more about
color and web accessibility.
Generative AI and Figures, images and artwork
Please read our policy on the use of generative AI and AI-assisted tools in ﬁgures, images and artwork, which can be
found in Elsevier’s GenAI Policies for Journals. This policy states:
We do not permit the use of Generative AI or AI-assisted tools to create or alter images in submitted
manuscripts.
The only exception is if the use of AI or AI-assisted tools is part of the research design or methods (for example, in
the ﬁeld of biomedical imaging). If this is the case, such use must be described in a reproducible manner in the
methods section, including the name of the model or tool, version and extension numbers, and manufacturer.
The use of generative AI or AI-assisted tools in the production of artwork such as for graphical abstracts is not
permitted. The use of generative AI in the production of cover art may in some cases be allowed, if the author
obtains prior permission from the journal editor and publisher, can demonstrate that all necessary rights have
been cleared for the use of the relevant material, and ensures that there is correct content attribution.
Supplementary material
We encourage the use of supplementary materials such as applications, images and sound clips to enhance
research. Some guidelines:
Supplementary material should be accurate and relevant to the research.
Cite all supplementary ﬁles in the manuscript text.
Submit all supplementary materials at the same time as your manuscript.
Include a concise, descriptive caption for each supplementary ﬁle, describing its content.
After submission supplementary ﬁles can only be added or replaced in the revision stage of the editorial process.
Be aware that all supplementary materials provided will appear online in the exact same way as received. These
ﬁles will not be checked, formatted or typeset by the production team.

Video
This journal accepts video material and animation sequences to support and enhance your scientiﬁc research. We
encourage you to include links to video or animation ﬁles within articles. Some guidelines:
When including video or animation ﬁle links within your article, refer to the video or animation content by
adding a note in your text where the ﬁle should be placed.
Clearly label ﬁles ensuring the given ﬁle name is directly related to the ﬁle content.
Provide ﬁles in one of our recommended ﬁle formats. Files should be within our preferred maximum ﬁle size of
150 MB per ﬁle, 1 GB in total.
Provide "stills" for each of your ﬁles. These will be used as standard icons to personalize the link to your video
data. You can choose any frame from your video or animation or make a separate image.
Provide descriptive text in your manuscript to refer to the video content. This text helps ensure accessibility for
visually impaired readers who rely on descriptive information. For journals publishing in print this is also
essential, as video and animation ﬁles cannot be embedded in the print version.
We publish all video and animation ﬁles supplied in the electronic version of your article.
For more detailed instructions, we recommend that you read our guidelines on submitting video content to be
included in the body of an article.
Research data
We are committed to supporting the storage of, access to and discovery of research data, and our research data
policy sets out the principles guiding how we work with the research community to support a more eﬃcient and
transparent research process.
Research data refers to the results of observations or experimentation that validate research ﬁndings, which may
also include software, code, models, algorithms, protocols, methods and other useful materials related to the
project.
Please read our guidelines on sharing research data for more information on depositing, sharing and using research
data and other relevant research materials.
Research data deposit, citation and linking
For this journal, Option C instructions from our research data guidelines apply. This means that you are required to:
Deposit your research data in a relevant data repository.
Cite and link to this dataset in your article.
If this is not possible, make a statement explaining why research data cannot be shared.
Data statement
To foster transparency, you are required to state the availability of any data at submission.

Ensuring data is available may be a requirement of your funding body or institution. If your data is unavailable to
access or unsuitable to post, you can state the reason why (e.g., your research data includes sensitive or conﬁdential
information such as patient data) during the submission process. This statement will appear with your published
article on ScienceDirect.
Read more about the importance and beneﬁts of providing a data statement.
Data linking
Linking to the data underlying your work increases your exposure and may lead to new collaborations. It also
provides readers with a better understanding of the described research.
If your research data has been made available in a data repository there are a number of ways your article can be
linked directly to the dataset:
Provide a link to your dataset when prompted during the online submission process.
For some data repositories, a repository banner will automatically appear next to your published article on
ScienceDirect.
You can also link relevant data or entities within the text of your article through the use of identiﬁers. Use the
following format: Database: 12345 (e.g. TAIR: AT1G01020; CCDC: 734053; PDB: 1XFN).
Learn more about linking research data and research articles in ScienceDirect.
Co-submission of related data, methods or protocols
You are encouraged to publish a description of your research data, methods, or protocols related to your regular
article as a co-submission article in Data in Brief or MethodsX.
This co-submission can be submitted at the same time as your regular manuscript submission to this journal. If both
your regular and co-submitted manuscripts are accepted for publication, they will be linked together on
ScienceDirect, thereby promoting research reproducibility, interoperability, and open science.
Prepare a separate manuscript describing your research data, methods, or protocols using the mandatory
templates from Data in Brief or in MethodsX.
Submit this co-submission alongside your regular manuscript as a separate submission item; on the ‘Attach ﬁles’
page in Editorial Manager, after which it will be automatically forwarded to the Data in Brief or MethodsX and
assigned an editor.
For associated Article Processing Charge (APC) details, please visit:
MethodsX
Data in Brief
Please note: Due to the automated process of submitting to Data in Brief or MethodsX, only after acceptance will you
be presented with a personalized OA Article Publishing Charge based on your individual context (your country,
institutional aﬃliation, and any society membership for example).
Please visit co-submission Researcher Support page for more information on how to submit a co-submission.

Article structure
Article sections
Divide your article into clearly deﬁned and numbered sections. Number subsections 1.1 (then 1.1.1, 1.1.2, ...), then
1.2, etc.
Use the numbering format when cross-referencing within your article. Do not just refer to "the text."
You may give subsections a brief heading. Headings should appear on a separate line.
Do not include the article abstract within section numbering.
Introduction
The introduction should clearly state the objectives of your work. We recommend that you provide an adequate
background to your work but avoid writing a detailed literature overview or summary of your results.
Methods
The methods section should provide suﬃcient details about your materials and methods to allow your work to be
reproduced by an independent researcher. Some guidelines:
If the method you used has already been published, provide a summary and reference the originally published
method.
If you are quoting directly from a previously published method, use quotation marks and cite the source.
Describe any modiﬁcations that you have made to existing methods.
Results
Results should be clear, concise and reproducible. We advise you to read the sections in this guide on supplying
tables, artwork, supplementary material and sharing research data.
Discussion
The discussion section should explore the signiﬁcance of your results but not repeat them. We recommend that you
avoid the use of extensive citations and discussion of published literature in the discussion section.
Conclusion
The conclusion section should present the main conclusions of your study. You may have a stand-alone conclusions
section or include your conclusions in a subsection of your discussion or results and discussion section.
Author contributions: CRediT
Corresponding authors are required to acknowledge co-author contributions using CRediT (Contributor Roles
Taxonomy) roles:
Conceptualization
Data curation
Formal analysis
Funding acquisition

Investigation
Methodology
Project administration
Resources
Software
Supervision
Validation
Visualization
Writing – original draft
Writing – review and editing
Not all CRediT roles will apply to every manuscript and some authors may contribute through multiple roles.
We advise you to read more about CRediT and view an example of a CRediT author statement.
Appendices
We ask you to use the following format for appendices:
Identify individual appendices within your article using the format: A, B, etc.
Give separate numbering to formulae and equations within appendices using formats such as Eq. (A.1), Eq. (A.2),
etc. and in subsequent appendices, Eq. (B.1), Eq. (B. 2) etc. In a similar way, give separate numbering to tables and
ﬁgures using formats such as Table A.1; Fig. A.1, etc.
References
References within text
Any references cited within your article should also be present in your reference list and vice versa. Some guidelines:
References cited in your abstract must be given in full.
We recommend that you do not include unpublished results and personal communications in your reference list,
though you may mention them in the text of your article.
Any unpublished results and personal communications included in your reference list must follow the standard
reference style of the journal. In substitution of the publication date add "unpublished results" or "personal
communication."
References cited as "in press" imply that the item has been accepted for publication.
Linking to cited sources will increase the discoverability of your research.

Before submission, check that all data provided in your reference list are correct, including any references which
have been copied. Providing correct reference data allows us to link to abstracting and indexing services such as
Scopus, Crossref and PubMed. Any incorrect surnames, journal or book titles, publication years or pagination within
your references may prevent link creation.
We encourage the use of Digital Object Identiﬁers (DOIs) as reference links as they provide a permanent link to the
electronic article referenced.
Reference format
This journal does not set strict requirements on reference formatting at submission. Some guidelines:
References can be in any style or format as long as the style is consistent.
Author names, journal or book titles, chapter or article titles, year of publication, volume numbers, article
numbers or pagination must be included, where applicable.
Use of DOIs is recommended.
Our journal reference style will be applied to your article after acceptance, at proof stage. If required, at this stage
we will ask you to correct or supply any missing reference data.
Reference style
All citations in the text should refer to:
Single author: the author's name (without initials, unless there is ambiguity) and the year of publication.
Two authors: both authors' names and the year of publication.
Three or more authors: ﬁrst author's name followed by 'et al.' and the year of publication.
Citations can be made directly (or parenthetically). Groups of references can be listed either ﬁrst alphabetically, then
chronologically, or vice versa. Examples: "as demonstrated (Allan, 2020a, 2020b; Allan and Jones, 2019)" or "as
demonstrated (Jones, 2019; Allan, 2020). Kramer et al. (2023) have recently shown".
The list of references should be arranged alphabetically and then chronologically if necessary. More than one
reference from the same author(s) in the same year must be identiﬁed by the letters 'a', 'b', 'c', etc., placed after the
year of publication.
Abbreviate journal names according to the List of Title Word Abbreviations (LTWA).
Examples:
Reference to a journal publication:
Van der Geer, J., Handgraaf, T., Lupton, R.A., 2020. The art of writing a scientiﬁc article. J. Sci. Commun. 163, 51–59.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sc.2020.00372.
Reference to a journal publication with an article number:

Van der Geer, J., Handgraaf, T., Lupton, R.A., 2022. The art of writing a scientiﬁc article. Heliyon. 19, e00205.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e00205.
Reference to a book:
Strunk Jr., W., White, E.B., 2000. The Elements of Style, fourth ed. Longman, New York.
Reference to a chapter in a book:
Mettam, G.R., Adams, L.B., 2023. How to prepare an electronic version of your article, in: Jones, B.S., Smith, R.Z. (Eds.),
Introduction to the Electronic Age. E-Publishing Inc., New York, pp. 281–304.
Reference to a website:
Cancer Research UK, 2023. Cancer statistics reports for the UK.
http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/aboutcancer/statistics/cancerstatsreport/ (accessed 13 March 2023).
Reference to a dataset:
Oguro, M., Imahiro, S., Saito, S., Nakashizuka, T., 2015. Mortality data for Japanese oak wilt disease and surrounding
forest compositions [dataset]. Mendeley Data, v1. https://doi.org/10.17632/xwj98nb39r.1.
Reference to software:
Coon, E., Berndt, M., Jan, A., Svyatsky, D., Atchley, A., Kikinzon, E., Harp, D., Manzini, G., Shelef, E., Lipnikov, K.,
Garimella, R., Xu, C., Moulton, D., Karra, S., Painter, S., Jafarov, E., & Molins, S., 2020. Advanced Terrestrial Simulator
(ATS) v0.88 (Version 0.88) [software]. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3727209.
Web references
When listing web references, as a minimum you should provide the full URL and the date when the reference was
last accessed. Additional information (e.g. DOI, author names, dates or reference to a source publication) should also
be provided, if known.
You can list web references separately under a new heading directly after your reference list or include them in your
reference list.
Data references
We encourage you to cite underlying or relevant datasets within article text and to list data references in the
reference list.
When citing data references, you should include:
author name(s)
dataset title
data repository
version (where available)

year
global persistent identiﬁer
Add [dataset] immediately before your reference. This will help us to properly identify the dataset. The [dataset]
identiﬁer will not appear in your published article.
Software references
Cite software (including computational code, scripts, models, notebooks and libraries) in the same way as other
sources of information to support proper attribution and credit, reproducibility, collaboration and reuse, and
encourage building on the work of others to further research. To facilitate this, useful information is provided in this
article on the essentials of software citation by FORCE 11, of which Elsevier is a member.
A reference to software should include the following elements:
Creator(s): the authors or project that developed the software.
Title: the name of the software.
Publication venue: the publication venue of the software, preferably, an archive or repository that provides
permanent identiﬁers.
Date: the date the software was published. This is the date associated with a release or version of the software,
or “n.d.” if the date is unknown.
Identiﬁer: a resolvable pointer to the software, preferably, a PID that resolves to a landing page containing
descriptive metadata about the software, similar to how a Digital Object Identiﬁer (DOI) for a paper that points
to a page about the paper rather than directly to a representation of the paper, such as the PDF. DOIs are
preferable, and other examples of PIDs include Handles, RRIDs, ASCL IDs, swMath IDs, Software Heritage IDs,
ARK Alliance, etc. If there is no PID for the software, a URL to where the software exists may be the best identiﬁer
available.
Version: the identiﬁer for the version of the software being referenced. If the version is unidentiﬁed or unknown,
the date of access should be used.
Type: some reference styles (e.g., APA), require a bracketed description of the citation (e.g., [Computer software])
to be included.
If an article exists that describes the software, it should be cited as an additional reference, as well as citing the
software itself. Do not cite the article instead of the software.
Preprint references
We ask you to mark preprints clearly. You should include the word "preprint" or the name of the preprint server as
part of your reference and provide the preprint DOI.
Where a preprint has subsequently become available as a peer-reviewed publication, use the formal publication as
your reference.
If there are preprints that are central to your work or that cover crucial developments in the topic, but they are not
yet formally published, you may reference the preprint.

Reference management software
Most Elsevier journals have their reference template available in popular reference management software products.
These include products that support Citation Style Language (CSL) such as Mendeley Reference Manager.
If you use a citation plug-in from these products, select the relevant journal template and all your citations and
bibliographies will automatically be formatted in the journal style. We advise you to remove all ﬁeld codes before
submitting your manuscript to any reference management software product.
If a template is not available for this journal, follow the format given in examples in the reference style section of
this Guide for Authors.
Submitting your manuscript
Submission checklist
You can use this list to carry out a ﬁnal check of your submission before you send it to the journal for review. Please
check the relevant section in this Guide for Authors for more details.
Papers which do not respect the 4 following conditions will be desk-rejected without being sent to reviewers:
• Papers on new metaphor-based metaheuristics are very rarely accepted by EAAI (see details on this in the guide
online).
• The abstract should clearly specify which is the contribution in AI and which is the application in engineering.
• The use of undeﬁned acronyms in the title and in the abstract is forbidden.
• The papers must be formatted in single-column format.
Ensure that the following items are present:
One author has been designated as the corresponding author with contact details:
• E-mail address
• Full postal address
All necessary ﬁles have been uploaded:
Manuscript:
• Include keywords
• All ﬁgures (include relevant captions)
• All tables (including titles, description, footnotes)
• Ensure all ﬁgure and table citations in the text match the ﬁles provided
• Indicate clearly if color should be used for any ﬁgures in print

Graphical Abstracts / Highlights ﬁles (where applicable)
Supplemental ﬁles (where applicable)
Further considerations
• Manuscript has been 'spell checked' and 'grammar checked'
• All references mentioned in the Reference List are cited in the text, and vice versa
• Permission has been obtained for use of copyrighted material from other sources (including the Internet)
• A competing interests statement is provided, even if the authors have no competing interests to declare
• Journal policies detailed in this guide have been reviewed
• Referee suggestions and contact details provided, based on journal requirements
• Main article ﬁle size is strictly limited to max 50MB
For further information, visit our Support Center.
Submit online
Our online submission system guides you through the process steps of entering your manuscript details and
uploading your ﬁles. The system converts your article ﬁles to a single PDF ﬁle used in the peer-review process.
Editable ﬁles (e.g., Word, LaTeX) are required to typeset your article for ﬁnal publication. All correspondence,
including notiﬁcation of the editor's decision and requests for revision, is sent by email.
Please follow this link to submit your paper.
After receiving a ﬁnal decision
Article Transfer Service
If your manuscript is more suitable for an alternative journal published by Elsevier, you may receive an email asking
you to consider transferring your manuscript via the Elsevier Article Transfer Service.
The recommendation could come from the journal editor, a dedicated in-house scientiﬁc managing editor, a tool-
assisted recommendation or a combination.
If you agree with the recommendation, your manuscript will be transferred and independently reviewed by the
editors of the new journal. You will have the opportunity to make revisions, if necessary, before the submission is
complete at the destination journal.
Publishing agreement
Authors will be asked to complete a publishing agreement after acceptance. The corresponding author will receive a
link to the online agreement by email. We advise you to read Elsevier's policies related to copyright to learn more
about our copyright policies and your, and your employer’s/institution’s, additional rights for subscription and open
access articles.

License options
Authors will be oﬀered open access user license options which will determine how you, and third parties, can reuse
your open access article. We advise that you review these options and any funding body license requirements before
selecting a license option.
Open access
We refer you to our open access information page to learn about open access options for this journal.
Permission for copyrighted works
If excerpts from other copyrighted works are included in your article, you must obtain written permission from the
copyright owners and credit the source(s) within your article using Elsevier’s permission request and license form.
Online pre-proof article
This journal ensures that pre-proof articles (HTML and PDF formats) are available online as soon as possible after
acceptance. Please note that your accepted submission will be published immediately as a pre-proof, before author
proof corrections are taken into account. Pre-proof articles will have undergone enhancements after acceptance,
such as the addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but will not yet be the deﬁnitive
version of the article.
Pre-proof articles are allocated a Digital Object Identiﬁer (DOI) which ensures that the article is fully citable and
searchable by title, author name(s) and the full text. The PDF format will carry a disclaimer stating that it is an
unedited article. Subsequent production stages will replace the initial pre-proof version.
Proof correction
To ensure a fast publication process we will ask you to provide proof corrections within two days.
Corresponding authors will be sent an email which includes a link to our online prooﬁng system, allowing
annotation and correction of proofs online. The environment is similar to Word. You can edit text, comment on
ﬁgures and tables and answer questions raised by our copy editor. Our web-based prooﬁng service ensures a faster
and less error-prone process.
You can choose to annotate and upload your edits on the PDF version of your article, if preferred. We will provide you
with prooﬁng instructions and available alternative prooﬁng methods in our email.
The purpose of the proof is to check the typesetting, editing, completeness and correctness of your article text, tables
and ﬁgures. Signiﬁcant changes to your article at the prooﬁng stage will only be considered with approval of the
journal editor.
Share Link
A customized Share Link, providing 50 days free access to the ﬁnal published version of your article on ScienceDirect,
will be sent by email to the corresponding author. The Share Link can be used to share your article on any
communication channel, such as by email or on social media.
A Share Link will not be provided if your article is published open access. The ﬁnal published version of your open
access article will be openly available on ScienceDirect and can be shared through the article DOI link.
Responsible sharing
We encourage you to share and promote your article to give additional visibility to your work, enabling your paper to
contribute to scientiﬁc progress and foster the exchange of scientiﬁc developments within your ﬁeld. Read more

about how to responsibly share and promote your article.
Resources for authors
Language and editing services
We recommend that you write in American or British English but not a combination of both.
If you feel the English language in your manuscript requires editing to eliminate possible grammatical or spelling
errors and to conform to correct scientiﬁc English, you may wish to use the English Language Editing service
provided by Elsevier’s Author Services.
Getting help and support
Author support
We recommend that you visit our Journal Article Publishing Support Center if you have questions about the editorial
process or require technical support for your submission. Some popular FAQs:
How can I track the status of my submitted article?
When will my article be published?
All content on this site: Copyright © 2026 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar
technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply.